# Alphabetise Plugin

## What is it?

The Alphabetise plugin will alphabetise a given [Kirby CMS](http://getkirby.com/) *page* array or *tag* array and return it for further processing/display as an alphabetised array. 

*The array whose key your are trying to sort on should of course only contain letters of the alphabet, if not problems may occur.* 

*Also the code (explode) uses a '~' tilde, if you use this in your key, especially at the beginning of the string, then you could run into sorting problems. You could of course manually change it if required.*

## Installation 

Put the **alphabetise.php** and **alphabetise.mdown** files in your **site/plugins/alphabetise** folder.  If the 'alphabetise' plugin folder doesn't exist then create it.

## How to use it?

####Example 1: Alphabetical list of child pages using page title as the key:
#####A
+ Aa page
+ Ab page

---

#####B
+ Ba page
+ Bb page

---

In your template call, it like this:
```php
<?php $alphabetise = alphabetise($page->children()->visible()->sortby('title'), array('key' => 'title')); ?>
```
The first argument you pass is the sorted **page** array you want to *alphabetise*. The second array **key** argument is so you can set what you want to *alphabetise* by. It should be a string like a page 'title'. The 'sortby' and the 'key' should usually be the same.

You then want to loop through the returned results and display them for example:
```php
<?php foreach($alphabetise as $letter => $items): ?>
  <h4><?php echo strtoupper($letter) ?></h4>
  <ul>
      <?php foreach($items as $item): ?>
     	     <li>
     	         <a href="<?php echo $item->url()?>">
     	            <?php echo $item->title()?>
     	         </a>
     	     </li>
     	   <?php endforeach ?> 
    </ul>
   <hr/>
<?php endforeach ?>
```

####Example2: Alphabetical list of tags using tag name as the key 

#####A
+ Aa tag
+ Ab tag

---

#####B
+ Ba tag
+ Bb tag

**You require the tag plugin for this bit to work!** and *'pages'* in this example are the *pages* you want to get *tags* for.  
(See the [taglcoud plugin documentation](https://github.com/bastianallgeier/kirbycms-extensions/blob/master/plugins/tagcloud/tagcloud.php) for more information.)

In your template call it like this:
```php
<?php $alphabetise = alphabetise(tagcloud(($pages->find('pages')), array('sort' => 'name','sortdir'  => 'asc')), array('key' => 'name')); ?>
```

The first argument you pass is the **tagcloud** array you want to *alphabetise*. The second array **key** argument is so you can set what you want to *alphabetise* by. It should be a string like a tag 'name'.

You then want to loop through the returned results and display, note we are using **$item->name** not *item->title* as tags don't have titles, for example:

```php
<?php foreach($alphabetise as $letter => $items): ?>
  <h4><?php echo strtoupper($letter) ?></h4>
    <ul>
      <?php foreach($items as $item): ?>
     	     <li>
     	         <a href="<?php echo $item->url()?>">
     	         <?php echo $item->name()?>
     	         </a>
     	     </li>
     	   <?php endforeach ?>
    </ul>
  <hr/>
<?php endforeach ?>
```

You can use any valid array element, so for tags you can use also add **$item->results()** for example, which is the number of items with that tag:
```php
    <li>
        <a href="<?php echo $item->url()?>">
        <?php echo $item->name().' ('.($item->results()).')'?>
        </a>
    </li>
```	  

  
## Author
Russ Baldwin  
[shoesforindustry.net](shoesforindustry.net)